First draft of a Quickstart Guide (#1101)
scality/metalk8s: docs/installation-guide/quickstart.rst

Quickstart Guide
================
This guide describes how to set up a MetalK8s_ cluster to play with. It
offers general requirements and describes sizing, configuration, and
deployment. With respect to installation procedures, the only significant
difference between a test cluster and a full production environment is
the amount of resources required to implement the design.

.. _MetalK8s: https://github.com/scality/metalk8s/
.. _CentOS: https://www.centos.org
.. _Kubernetes: https://kubernetes.io

General Cluster Requirements
----------------------------
Setting up a MetalK8s_ cluster quickly requires at least three machines
running CentOS_ 7.6 or higher (these can be VMs) to which you have SSH access.
Each machine acting as a Kubernetes_ node (all three in the present example)
must also have at least one disk available to provision storage volumes.

> You will need to install a bootstrap node then others nodes (2 in our case).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will need to install a bootstrap node then other nodes (2 in our case).
```

> .. spelling::

Reviewer: For adding new valid spellings, we have a file at `docs/spelling-wordlist.txt`: just add these words to the file, one per line.

   Quickstart
   subdirectory
   Todo
   usernames

Quickstart Guide
================
This guide describes how to set up a MetalK8s_ cluster. It offers general
requirements and describes sizing, configuration, and deployment. With respect
to installation procedures, the only significant difference between a test
cluster and a full production environment is the amount of resources required
to implement the design.

.. _MetalK8s: https://github.com/scality/metalk8s/
.. _CentOS: https://www.centos.org
.. _Kubernetes: https://kubernetes.io

General Cluster Requirements
----------------------------

> Setting up a MetalK8s_ cluster quickly requires at least three machines

Reviewer: Does it, really? I mean, if you want HA, sure, but I'm not certain that's something we want to show as a _mandatory_ requirement. Thoughts @NicolasT?

Author: Well perhaps we should decide what kind of quickstart guide we need to write.
Is it for a PoC or for Production ? As there are not so much difference between the two options we can perhaps try to cover both.

Reviewer: Postponed, see #1120

running CentOS_ 7.6 or higher (these can be VMs) to which you have SSH access.
Each machine acting as a Kubernetes_ node (all three in the present example)
must also have at least one disk available to provision storage volumes.

> Since the version 2.x of MetalK8s_ you need to install first a bootstrap node

Reviewer: Let's not have anything mentioning (even indirectly) MetalK8s 1.x in here: it's the quickstart for 2.x, let's keep it straightforward.

and then the others nodes (2 in our case).

Sizing
^^^^^^

Each node must satisfy the following sizing requirements.

.. note::
   The root file system requires at least 40 GB.

+-----------------+--------+--------+-------+
|    Component    | etcd   | Master | Node  |
+=================+========+========+=======+
| Cores           | 2      | 4      | 4     |
+-----------------+--------+--------+-------+

> | RAM             | 4 GB   | 8 GB   | 8 GB  |

Reviewer: That much RAM? I thought control-plane nodes could live with less than that... @NicolasT?

Author: This is a dump copy/paste of the previous quickstart guide ;-)
Not sure at this point we know exactly how much memory/vCPU/storage is needed.

Reviewer: Postponed, see #1120

+-----------------+--------+--------+-------+
| Minimum         |        |        |       |
| dedicated       |        |        |       |
| storage capacity|        |        |       |

> | required        |    -   |    -   | 128 GB|

Reviewer: I don't think MetalK8s in itself has any requirement about storage capacity, except for the ISOs we mount on the bootstrap node. That would be more related to HyperDrive IMHO.

Author: Well we are talking about node ... This is something strange to say no storage ... By the way we need some storage for etcd and ES/Promotheus, perhaps we should show that.

Reviewer: Postponed, see #1120

+-----------------+--------+--------+-------+

Proxies
^^^^^^^
For nodes operating behind a proxy, add the following lines to each cluster
server's :file:`/etc/environment` file:

.. code-block:: shell

>  http_proxy=http://user;pass@<HTTP proxy IP address>:<port>

Reviewer: This block should be indented (3 spaces ideally)

Reviewer 2: 3 spaces? Is it a sphinx standard?
Indentation is usually a power of two (3 happens but it's rarer).

Reviewer: I think it is a ReST standard: the rationale is that a block directive follows the syntax `.. <directive>: [...]`, so alignment on the `<directive>` means 3 spaces, not 4

 https_proxy=http://user;pass@<HTTPS proxy IP address>:<port>
 no_proxy=localhost,127.0.0.1,<local IP of each node>

Mount MetalK8s ISO
-------------------
Get the ISO file and mount it on the bootstrap node at this specific path.

>   .. code-block:: shell

Reviewer: This shouldn't be indented

Author: Well ok but in this case what do we need to say ? ;-)

Author: nevermind I did not read it well sorry ;-)

   $ mkdir -p /srv/scality/metalk8s-2.0
   $ mount <path-to-iso> /srv/scality/metalk8s-2.0

Prepare the bootstap node
-------------------------
1. Create the :file:`/etc/metalk8s/bootstrap.yaml` file. Change the netmask,

>    IP addresse, and name to conform to your infrastructure.

Reviewer: The notion of netmask, in this context, is not clear for a new user. We would need to explain what the _control-plane_/_workload-plane_ networks are, and how they will be used. Given this, the example `BootstrapConfiguration` you defined below has a few issues:

- the same `<netmask>` placeholder is used for both networks, which can confuse the user as to whether he can have different values
- the mask is set to `/24` for both, which is not a requirement: the span of said networks would need to match the expected size of the cluster, but we have no strong requirement otherwise

Reviewer: Also:

```suggestion
   IP address, and name to conform to your infrastructure.
```

Reviewer: See #1121 for the networks explanation

>    .. code-block:: yaml

Reviewer: ditto

    apiVersion: metalk8s.scality.com/v1alpha2
    kind: BootstrapConfiguration
    networks:
     controlPlane: <netmask>/24
     workloadPlane: <netmask>/24
    ca:
     minion: <name-of-the-bootstrap-node>
    apiServer:
     host: <IP-of-the-bootstrap-node>

> 2. Generate the ssh key of the bootstrap and copy it.

Reviewer: Minor:

```suggestion
2. Generate the SSH key of the bootstrap and copy it.
```

>    .. code-block:: shell

Reviewer: ditto

    $ ssh-keygen
    $ ssh-copy-id <IP-of-the-bootstrap-node>

3. Copy the private key in the pki folder of MetalK8s. This will be use further for
   adding new nodes on the cluster.

>    .. code-block:: shell

Reviewer: ditto

Reviewer: I think you got the point :)

    $ mkdir -p /etc/metalk8s/pki/

>     $ cp /root/.ssh/id_rsa /etc/metalk8s/pki/id_rsa

Reviewer: Is it standard procedure? Maybe generating a new key for this specific purpose is better practice, I'm not certain.

Reviewer: See #1122

Install the bootstrap node
--------------------------
1. Run the script to install the bootstrap node.

   .. code-block:: shell

    $ /srv/scality/metalk8s-2.0/bootstrap.sh

> 2. You need to install kubectl for the CLI and check if pods are running well.

Reviewer: Not needed anymore, it's installed by default in the bootstrap script :)

Reviewer: Let's remove it

   .. code-block:: shell

    $ yum install —disablerepo=* —enablerepo=metalk8s-* kubectl

>     $ export KUBECONFIG=/etc/kubernetes/admin.conf

Reviewer: This is still required though.

    kube-system   kube-apiserver-bootstrap                      1/1       Running   0          17m       172.21.254.7   bootstrap.novalocal   <none>
    kube-system   kube-controller-manager-bootstrap             1/1       Running   0          17m       172.21.254.7   bootstrap.novalocal   <none>
    kube-system   kube-proxy-mwxhf                              1/1       Running   0          18m       172.21.254.7   bootstrap.novalocal   <none>
    kube-system   kube-scheduler-bootstrap                      1/1       Running   0          17m       172.21.254.7   bootstrap.novalocal   <none>
    kube-system   metalk8s-ui-656f6857b-cdt5p                   1/1       Running   0          18m       10.233.0.3     bootstrap.novalocal   <none>
    kube-system   package-repositories-bootstrap                1/1       Running   0          17m       172.21.254.7   bootstrap.novalocal   <none>
    kube-system   registry-bootstrap                            1/1       Running   0          17m       172.21.254.7   bootstrap.novalocal   <none>
    kube-system   salt-master-bootstrap                         2/2       Running   0          17m       172.21.254.7   bootstrap.novalocal   <none>

> Adding a master to the cluster

Reviewer: Can we use the wording "control-plane node"/"workload-plane node" instead of just "master"/"node"?

Reviewer: See #1123

------------------------------

> Now it's time to add more node to the cluster. First you need to secure the

Reviewer: _secure_? This may be misinterpreted, the idea is to "add redundancy to the cluster control-plane, for HA" (wording may not be perfect though).

Reviewer: Minor:

```suggestion
Now it's time to add more nodes to the cluster. First you need to secure the
```

cluster by adding 2 nodes with etcd and master roles.
Here is the procedure to add one, simply do it twice to have 3
masters (bootstrap + 2 new master).

1. Copy the ssh-key to the new node

   .. code-block:: shell

>     $ ssh-copy-id <IP-of-the-new-master-node>

Reviewer: If we generate a new key for use in `/etc/metalk8s/pki`, this command would need to be updated:

```suggestion
    $ ssh-copy-id -i /etc/metalk8s/pki/<key_name> <IP-of-the-new-master-node>
```

Reviewer: See #1122

> 2. Create a yaml config file for this new master.

Reviewer: Minor:

```suggestion
2. Create a YAML config file for this new master.
```

Reviewer: Actually, might be better to describe it with accurate terms: it's a _`Node` manifest_

Reviewer 3: Unless we're against linking to K8s documentation, if we're using K8s terms we should link to the K8s documentation of these terms where relevant.

Reviewer: We're not against linking, on the contrary, it's a good idea! There's the `intersphinx` extension already, though I'm not sure if it can be used for K8s docs.

See #1124

   .. code-block:: yaml

    apiVersion: v1
    kind: Node
    metadata:
      name: <new-master-node-name>
      annotations:
        metalk8s.scality.com/ssh-key-path: /etc/metalk8s/pki/id_rsa
        metalk8s.scality.com/ssh-host: <IP-of-the-new-master-node>
        metalk8s.scality.com/ssh-sudo: 'false'
      labels:
        metalk8s.scality.com/version: '2.0'
        node-role.kubernetes.io/master: ''
        node-role.kubernetes.io/etcd: ''
    spec:
      taints:
      - effect: NoSchedule
        key: node-role.kubernetes.io/master
      - effect: NoSchedule
        key: node-role.kubernetes.io/etcd

3. Declare the new master node into the cluster.

   .. code-block:: shell

>     $ kubectl --kubeconfig /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf apply -f new-master-node.yaml

Reviewer: `--kubeconfig` is not needed if you did the `export KUBECONFIG` first.

Reviewer 3: I would lean towards leaving `--kubeconfig` everywhere, and explain at the `export KUBECONFIG` step that it negates the need to have this option.

That way the commands can stand alone without prior expectations.

    node/new-master-node created

> 4. Check that the new master node is correctly inserted into the cluster.

Reviewer: Minor:

```suggestion
4. Check that the new master node was correctly added to the cluster.
```

Reviewer: Or maybe:

```suggestion
4. Check that the new master node is now a member of the cluster.
```

   .. code-block:: shell

    $ kubectl get node
    NAME                   STATUS    ROLES                         AGE       VERSION
    bootstrap              Ready     bootstrap,etcd,infra,master   12d       v1.11.7
    new-master-node        Unknown   etcd,master                   29s

> 5. The new master node now need to be installed to change its status from Unknown to Ready.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. The new master node now needs to be deployed to change its status from Unknown to Ready.
```

>    You go into the master-bootstrap pod ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   First open a session in the ``salt-master`` container:
```

   .. code-block:: shell

>     $ kubectl -ti -n kube-system exec salt-master-bootstrap bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    $ kubectl exec salt-master-bootstrap -n kube-system -c salt-master -it bash
```

>    Try first to ping the new master node ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Try to ping the new master node:
```

   .. code-block:: shell

>     $ salt-ssh -i --roster kubernetes <new-master-node-name> test.ping

Reviewer: The `-i` is not needed anymore:

```suggestion
    $ salt-ssh --roster kubernetes <new-master-node-name> test.ping
```

    <new-master-node-name>:
        True

   Launch the command to perform the installation

   .. code-block:: shell

>     $ salt-run state.orchestrate metalk8s.orchestrate.deploy_new_node saltenv=metalk8s-2.0 \

Reviewer: Missed that one:

```suggestion
    $ salt-run state.orchestrate metalk8s.orchestrate.deploy_node saltenv=metalk8s-2.0 \
```

Author: Well my note got deploy_new_node ... Are you sure of that @gdemonet ?

>       pillar="{'bootstrap_id': 'bootstrap', 'node_name': '<new-master-node-name>'}"

Reviewer 4: Bootstrap_id no longer needed and `node_name` should be in `orchestrate` section
```suggestion
      pillar="{'orchestrate:' {'node_name': '<new-master-node-name>'}}"
```

      ... lots of output ...
      Summary for bootstrap_master
      ------------
      Succeeded: 7 (changed=7)
      Failed:    0
      ------------
      Total states run:     7
      Total run time: 121.468 s

>    .. warning::

Reviewer: You can remove this warning, we now deploy the "loopback CNI" by default.

Reviewer: Let's remove it

>     In version 2.0 you need to trick cni on the new node to have the correct status.

Reviewer 2: s/cni/CNI/

    check if the cluster is healthy

    .. code-block:: shell

     $ etcdctl --endpoints=https://[127.0.0.1]:2379 \
       --ca-file=/etc/kubernetes/pki/etcd/ca.crt \
       --cert-file=/etc/kubernetes/pki/etcd/healthcheck-client.crt \
       --key-file=/etc/kubernetes/pki/etcd/healthcheck-client.key cluster-health

       member 46af28ca4af6c465 is healthy: got healthy result from https://172.21.254.6:2379
       member 81de403db853107e is healthy: got healthy result from https://172.21.254.7:2379
       member 8878627efe0f46be is healthy: got healthy result from https://172.21.254.8:2379
       cluster is healthy

Adding a node to the cluster
----------------------------
You can now add more nodes without any backplane roles. These nodes are here to
handle applications you will install on the cluster.

1. Copy the ssh-key to the new node

   .. code-block:: shell

    $ ssh-copy-id <IP-of-the-new-node>

2. Create a yaml config file for this new node.

   .. code-block:: yaml

    apiVersion: v1
    kind: Node
    metadata:
      name: <new-node-name>
      annotations:
        metalk8s.scality.com/ssh-key-path: /etc/metalk8s/pki/id_rsa

>         metalk8s.scality.com/ssh-host: <IP-of-the-new-master-node>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        metalk8s.scality.com/ssh-host: <IP-of-the-new-node>
```

        metalk8s.scality.com/ssh-sudo: 'false'
      labels:
        metalk8s.scality.com/version: '2.0'
        node-role.kubernetes.io/node: ''
    spec:
      taints:
      - effect: NoSchedule
        key: node-role.kubernetes.io/node

> 3. Declare the new  node into the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Declare the new ``Node` in K8s API.
```

   .. code-block:: shell

>     $ kubectl --kubeconfig /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf apply -f new-node.yaml

Reviewer: No need for `--kubeconfig`

    node/new-node created

> 4. Check that the new master node is correctly inserted into the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Check that the new node was added to the cluster.
```

   .. code-block:: shell

>     $ kubectl get node

Reviewer: It works like this, but if you may:

```suggestion
    $ kubectl get nodes
```

    NAME                   STATUS    ROLES                         AGE       VERSION
    bootstrap              Ready     bootstrap,etcd,infra,master   1h        v1.11.7
    master-node-01         Ready     etcd,master                   1h        v1.11.7
    master-node-02         Ready     etcd,master                   1h        v1.11.7
    node-01                Unknown   node                          17s

5. The new  node now need to be installed to change its status from Unknown to Ready.
   You go into the master-bootstrap pod ...

   .. code-block:: shell

    $ kubectl -ti -n kube-system exec salt-master-bootstrap bash

   Try first to ping the new master node ...

   .. code-block:: shell

    $ salt-ssh -i --roster kubernetes <new-node-name> test.ping
    <new-node-name>:
        True

   Launch the command to perform the installation

   .. code-block:: shell

>     $ salt-run state.orchestrate metalk8s.orchestrate.deploy_new_node saltenv=metalk8s-2.0 \

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    $ salt-run state.orchestrate metalk8s.orchestrate.deploy_node saltenv=metalk8s-2.0 \
```

>       pillar="{'bootstrap_id': 'bootstrap', 'node_name': '<new-node-name>'}"

Reviewer 4: Same as above 
```suggestion
      pillar="{'orchestrate:' {'node_name': '<new-node-name>'}}"
```
